Explain the Automatically Applied Affinity Rules (#827)
harvester/docs: docs/troubleshooting/vm.md

### Related Issue

https://github.com/harvester/harvester/issues/6644

## Virtual Machine is Unschedulable due to the Unsatisfied Affinity Rules

One VM shows `unscheduable`.

![](/img/v1.5/troubleshooting/unschedulable-vm.png)

Check the VM definition, it has below `Affinity` rule.

```
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachine
metadata:
  name: vm100
  namespace: default
    spec:
      affinity:
        nodeAffinity:
          requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
            nodeSelectorTerms:
              - matchExpressions:
                  - key: network.harvesterhci.io/cn2
                    operator: In
                    values:
                      - 'true'
```

> The POD status is `Pending`, the detailed error shows that no node can meet the `Affinity` rule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pod status is `Pending`, and the error message indicates that no node meets the affinity rule's criteria.
```

```
$ kubectl get pods
NAME                        READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
virt-launcher-vm100-f4nh4   0/2     Pending   0          5m12s

$ kubectl get pods virt-launcher-vm100-f4nh4 -oyaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: virt-launcher-vm100-f4nh4
  namespace: default
spec:
  affinity:
    nodeAffinity:
      requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
        nodeSelectorTerms:
        - matchExpressions:
          - key: network.harvesterhci.io/cn2
            operator: In
            values:
            - "true"

...
status:
  conditions:
  - lastProbeTime: null
    lastTransitionTime: "2025-07-28T16:21:56Z"
    message: '0/2 nodes are available: 1 node(s) didn''t match Pod''s node affinity/selector,
      1 node(s) had untolerated taint {node.kubernetes.io/unreachable: }. preemption:
      0/2 nodes are available: 2 Preemption is not helpful for scheduling.'
    reason: Unschedulable
    status: "False"
    type: PodScheduled
...

```

> ### Root cause
> 
> Based on the definition of VM, Harvester [applies some Affinity rules automatically](../vm/create-vm.md#automatically-applied-affinity-rules). In the above example, the VM attaches to cluster network `cn2`, then Harvester applies `Affifnity` rule `network.harvesterhci.io/cn2`. But there is no node meets this rule and hence the VM is not schedulable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Root Cause

Harvester [automatically applies affinity rules](../vm/create-vm.md#automatically-applied-affinity-rules) based on how a virtual machine is configured. In the above example, the virtual machine `vm100` attaches to the cluster network `cn2`, and Harvester applies the affinity rule `network.harvesterhci.io/cn2`. However, no nodes meet the rule's criteria, so the virtual machine cannot be scheduled.
```

> ### Workaround
> 
> Ensure there are active nodes which has already setup the cluster network `cn2`, then the node has the label `network.harvesterhci.io/cn2` and can schedule the pending pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Workaround

Ensure that the cluster network is configured and the required label (for example, `network.harvesterhci.io/cn2`) is applied on active nodes. In addition, ensure that the pending pod can be scheduled on these nodes.
```

Author: Need to keep the original description; the `cn2` has been defined, but there is no active node; it is not `cluster network is configured`;  and the label is added by controller automatically, user can't ensure the label.
